1. Clin Ther. 2024 Mar;46(3):285-288. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2023.12.011. Epub 
2024 Jan 18.

Joint Flexibility and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome After 
Mononucleosis.

Poomkudy JT(1), Torres C(2), Jason LA(2), Fishbein J(3), Katz BZ(4).

Author information:
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)DePaul University Center for Community Research, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Ann & Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Division of Infectious 
Diseases, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, Chicago, Illinois, USA; Ann & Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Division of Infectious Diseases, Chicago, Illinois, USA. Electronic 
address: bkatz@northwestern.edu.

PURPOSE: Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a 
chronic disease characterized by substantial fatigue, postexertional malaise, 
unrefreshing sleep, and orthostatic intolerance, among other symptoms. Specific 
risk factors for the development of ME/CFS have not been adequately 
characterized. It has been suggested that ME/CFS is a connective tissue disorder 
and that joint hyperflexibility is a risk factor for the development of ME/CFS.
METHODS: The goal of this study was to examine whether joint hyperflexibility is 
a risk factor for the development of ME/CFS after infectious mononucleosis (IM). 
This study was part of a prospective cohort study. College students were studied 
for the development of IM and were followed up for the development of ME/CFS 6 
months later. Participants in the cohort for the present study included 53 
students who met criteria for ME/CFS 6 months after IM and 66 recovered control 
subjects who had modified Beighton scores (a measure of joint hyperflexibility) 
available.
FINDINGS: No connection was found between joint hyperflexibility and the 
development of ME/CFS after IM. Differences in joint hyperflexibility (as 
measured by using the modified Beighton score) in the ME/CFS group and the 
control group were not statistically significant. Female subjects had 
significantly higher Beighton scores compared with male subjects.
IMPLICATION: After IM, no relationship was found between joint hyperflexibility 
and the development of ME/CFS.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2023.12.011
PMCID: PMC11009060
PMID: 38242746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None of the 
authors have any associations that may pose a conflict of interest (including 
but not limited to pharmaceutical stock ownership, consultancy, advisory board 
membership, relevant patents, or research funding) for at least the 2 years 
before manuscript submission. The sponsor had no role in study design, in the 
collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; 
and in the decision to submit the article for publication.