1. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2022;53:55-78. doi: 10.1007/7854_2021_242.

Microglia and Sensitive Periods in Brain Development.

Dziabis JE(1)(2), Bilbo SD(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 
staci.bilbo@duke.edu.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 
staci.bilbo@duke.edu.

From embryonic neuronal migration to adolescent circuit refinement, the immune 
system plays an essential role throughout central nervous system (CNS) 
development. Immune signaling molecules serve as a common language between the 
immune system and CNS, allowing them to work together to modulate brain function 
both in health and disease. As the resident CNS macrophage, microglia comprise 
the majority of immune cells in the brain. Much like their peripheral 
counterparts, microglia survey their environment for pathology, clean up debris, 
and propagate inflammatory responses when necessary. Beyond this, recent studies 
have highlighted that microglia perform a number of complex tasks during neural 
development, from directing neuronal and axonal positioning to pruning synapses, 
receptors, and even whole cells. In this chapter, we discuss this literature 
within the framework that immune activation during discrete windows of neural 
development can profoundly impact brain function long-term, and thus the risk of 
neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders. In this chapter, we review 
three sensitive developmental periods - embryonic wiring, early postnatal 
synaptic pruning, and adolescent circuit refinement - in order to highlight the 
diversity of functions that microglia perform in building a brain. In reviewing 
this literature, it becomes obvious that timing matters, perhaps more so than 
the nature of the immune activation itself; largely conserved patterns of 
microglial response to diverse insults result in different functional impacts 
depending on the stage of brain maturation at the time of the challenge.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/7854_2021_242
PMID: 34463934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]