1. J Clin Med. 2025 May 22;14(11):3648. doi: 10.3390/jcm14113648.

The Relation Between Cardiac Output and Cerebral Blood Flow in ME/CFS Patients 
with a POTS Response During a Tilt Test.

van Campen CLMC(1), Visser FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Stichting CardioZorg, Kraayveld 5, 1171 JE Badhoevedorp, The Netherlands.

Background/Objectives: Orthostatic intolerance is prevalent in patients with 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and is caused by an 
abnormal reduction in cerebral blood flow (CBF). In healthy controls (HCs), CBF 
is regulated complexly, and cardiac output (CO) is an important determinant of 
CBF. A review in HC showed that a 30% reduction in CO results in a 10% reduction 
in CBF. In contrast, we showed in ME/CFS patients with a normal HR (HR) and 
blood pressure response during a tilt test that CO and CBF decreased to a 
similar extent. The relation between CO and CBF in ME/CFS patients with postural 
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is unknown. Therefore, the aim of this 
study is to assess the relation between CBF and CO, in ME/CFS patients with 
POTS. The methods used in this retrospective study analyze this relation in a 
large group of patients. We also analyzed the influence of clinical data. A 
total of 260 ME/CFS patients with POTS underwent tilt testing with measurements 
of HR, BP, CBF, CO, and end-tidal PCO2. We measured CBF using extracranial 
Doppler flow velocity and vessel diameters obtained with a General Electric echo 
system, and suprasternal aortic flow velocities were measured using the same 
device. We recorded end-tidal PCO2 using a Nonin Lifesense device. Results: 
End-tilt HR and the HR increase were significantly higher in the patients with a 
%CO reduction ≥ -15% than in the other group. End-tilt CO was higher and the %CO 
reduction was lower in patients with %CO reduction ≥ -15% than in the other 
group. CBF data (supine, end-tilt and the %CBF reduction) were not different 
between the two patient groups. The use of HR increases and %SV reductions were 
not as discriminative as the %CO reduction. Conclusions: In ME/CFS patients with 
POTS during tilt testing with measurements of both the CO and the CBF, two 
different patterns were observed: (1) appr. two-thirds of patients had an almost 
1:1 relation between the %CBF reduction and the %CO reduction. (2) Appr. 
one-third of patients showed a limited reduction in CO together with a 
substantial increase in HR. In these patients, there was no relation between the 
CO and CBF reduction. These data suggest the presence of a hyperadrenergic 
response.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm14113648
PMCID: PMC12156179
PMID: 40507411

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.