Title: Regulatory Cycles of Orexin and Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 in Post-Viral Syndromes.
Authors: Ruhrländer Jana; Schieffer Elisabeth; Schieffer Bernhard
Journal: Endocrine reviews (2026)
DOI: 10.1210/endrev/bnag009
PMID: 42037238

ABSTRACT:
Post-viral syndromes are heterogeneous multisystem diseases without a uniform etiology that occur as a result of acute viral infections. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of patients increased dramatically due to infections with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). This is known as post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC), with many cases also meeting the criteria for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), the most severe form of a post-viral disease, characterized by severe fatigue, post-exertional malaise (PEM), unrefreshing sleep, neurocognitive impairment, and autonomic and immune dysregulation. Orexin (OX) neuropeptides, which regulate arousal, metabolism, and neuroendocrine functions, may serve as a central link between stress, immune activation, and metabolic changes in these syndromes. Notable phenotypic similarities between OX system dysfunction and core features of PASC and ME/CFS, including fatigue, sleep issues, impaired glucose metabolism, and neuropsychiatric symptoms, support a mechanistic model in which impaired OX signaling contributes to post-viral endocrine and metabolic dysfunction. This review examines the role of OX in regulating glucose metabolism, HPA axis activity, and systemic homeostasis, with a specific focus on sexually dimorphic expression and function in relation to post-viral syndromes. We also highlight the effect of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), another key player in metabolism, which also has neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory, vasoprotective, and immunomodulatory effects. We further emphasize emerging therapeutic strategies, such as GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs) and drugs targeting the OX system. Together, these insights provide an integrated framework for understanding and targeting the neuroendocrine-metabolic underpinnings of PASC, ME/CFS, and other post-viral syndromes.