1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2024 Dec;15(6):2781-2791. doi:
10.1002/jcsm.13628.  Epub 2024 Nov 19.

Intermittent Hypoxic-Hyperoxic Training During Inpatient Rehabilitation Improves 
Exercise Capacity and Functional Outcome in Patients With Long Covid: Results of 
a Controlled Clinical Pilot Trial.

Doehner W(1)(2)(3), Fischer A(1), Alimi B(4), Muhar J(4), Springer J(1), Altmann 
C(5), Schueller PO(4).

Author information:
(1)Berlin Institute of Health Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)German Heart Center of the Charite, Department of Cardiology, Campus Virchow, 
German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site Berlin, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Center for Stroke Research Berlin (CSB), Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Klinik für Kardiologie und Pneumologie, Median Klinikum Flechtingen, 
Flechtingen, Germany.
(5)MVZ Cardiologicum Dresden und Pirna, Studienzentrum Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Long COVID-19 illness is a severely disabling disease with 
shortness of breath, weakness and fatigue as leading symptoms, resulting in poor 
quality of life and substantial delay in return to work. No specific respiratory 
therapy has been validated for patients with long COVID. The intermittent 
hypoxia-hyperoxia training (IHHT) is a respiratory therapeutic modality to 
improve exercise performance via controlled respiratory conditioning. The 
purpose of the present study is to investigate the therapeutic effect of IHHT on 
functional and symptomatic recovery of patients with long COVID syndrome.
METHODS: A prospective, controlled, open-treatment interventional study was 
conducted in patients with long COVID who were admitted to an inpatient 
rehabilitation programme. Patients were assigned nonrandomized to receive IHHT 
in addition to the standardized rehabilitation programme (IHHT group) or 
standard rehabilitation alone (control group). The IHHT group received 
supervised sessions of intermittent hypoxic (10-12% O2) and hyperoxic (30-35% 
O2) breathing three times per week throughout the rehabilitation period. Primary 
endpoint was improved walking distance in a 6-min walk test (6MWT) between study 
groups. Secondary endpoints were change in stair climbing power, dyspnoea (Borg 
dyspnoea Scale), fatigue assessment scale (FAS) and change in health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL) assessed by patient global assessment (PGA), EQ-5D 
analogue scale and the MEDIAN Corona Recovery Score (MCRS). Further assessments 
included maximum handgrip strength, nine hole peg test, timed up-and-go, 
respiratory function and functional ambulation category (FAC), serum analyses 
and safety of the intervention.
RESULTS: A total of 145 patients were included in the study (74% female, mean 
age 53 ± 12 years) and assigned to IHHT (n = 70) or standard care (n = 75). The 
6MWT distance improved 2.8-fold in the IHHT group compared to the control group 
(91.7 ± 50.1 m vs. 32.6 ± 54.2 m, ANCOVA p < 0.001). Stair climbing power 
improved 3.7-fold in the IHHT group compared to controls (-1.91 ± 2.23 s vs. 
-0.51 ± 1.93 s, p < 0.001). Secondary endpoints on dyspnoea, fatigue and HRQoL 
(PGA, EQ-5D and MCRS) improved significantly in the IHHT group compared to 
controls. The IHHT group exhibited a significant decrease in blood pressure, 
heart rate and increase in haemoglobin levels that was not observed in the 
control group. No adverse events were observed.
CONCLUSION: Respiratory treatment with IHHT in addition to a multidisciplinary 
rehabilitation programme improves functional capacity, symptomatic status and 
quality of life in patients with disabling long COVID. IHHT has been 
demonstrated to be safe, well tolerated and feasible to be integrated in an 
inpatient rehabilitation programme to improve outcome in long COVID.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.13628
PMCID: PMC11634465
PMID: 39559920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: W. Doehner reports consulting fees and speaker 
honoraria from Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Cardiomatics, 
Aimediq, Medtronic, Vifor Pharma, travel support from Pharmacosmos and research 
support to the Institute from EU (Horizon2020), German Ministry of Education and 
Research, German Center for Cardiovascular Research, German Pension Insurance 
(regional Mitteldeutschland) Boehringer Ingelheim, Vifor Pharma. C. Altmann 
reports consulting fees, speaker honoraria and research support from Pfizer, 
Amgen, Amarin, Novartis. P. Schüller declares consulting fees, speaker honoraria 
and research support from Pfizer, Amgen, Amarin and Novartis. A. Shafieesabet, 
B. Alimi, J. Muhar and J. Springer report no conflict of interest.