Cell Death Dis. 2026 Jan 9;17(1):16. doi: 10.1038/s41419-025-08162-2.

Virus-induced endothelial senescence as a cause and driving factor for ME/CFS
and long COVID: mediated by a dysfunctional immune system.

Nunes M, Kell L, Slaghekke A, Wüst RC, Fielding BC, Kell DB, Pretorius E.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and long COVID are
two post-viral diseases, which share many common symptoms and pathophysiological
alterations. Yet a mechanistic explanation of disease induction and maintenance
is lacking. This hinders the discovery and implementation of biomarkers and
treatment options, and ultimately the establishment of effective clinical
resolution. Here, we propose that acute viral infection results in (in)direct
endothelial dysfunction and senescence, which at the blood-brain barrier,
cerebral arteries, gastrointestinal tract, and skeletal muscle can explain
symptoms. The endothelial senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) is
proinflammatory, pro-oxidative, procoagulant, primed for vasoconstriction, and
characterized by impaired regulation of tissue repair, but also leads to
dysregulated inflammatory processes. Immune abnormalities in ME/CFS and long
COVID can account for the persistence of endothelial senescence long past the
acute infection by preventing their clearance, thereby providing a mechanism for
the chronic nature of ME/CFS and long COVID. The systemic and tissue-specific
effects of endothelial senescence can thus explain the multisystem involvement
in and subtypes of ME/CFS and long COVID, including dysregulated blood flow and
perfusion deficits. This can occur in all tissues, but especially the brain as
evidenced by findings of reduced cerebral blood flow and impaired perfusion of
various brain regions, post-exertional malaise (PEM), gastrointestinal
disturbances, and fatigue. Paramount to this theory is the affected endothelium,
and the bidirectional sustainment of immune abnormalities and endothelial
senescence. The recognition of endothelial cell dysfunction and senescence as a
core element in the aetiology of both ME/CFS and Long COVID should aid in the
establishment of effective biomarkers and treatment regimens.

PMID: 41513611
PMCID: PMC12789617
DOI: 10.1038/s41419-025-08162-2

Conflict of interest: The authors declare no competing interests.
