Virus-induced endothelial senescence as a cause and driving factor for ME/CFS and long COVID: mediated by a dysfunctional immune system.

Authors: Nunes M, Kell L, Slaghekke A, Wüst RC, Fielding BC, Kell DB, Pretorius E.
Journal: Cell Death & Disease, 2026 Jan 9;17(1):16. doi: 10.1038/s41419-025-08162-2.
PMCID: PMC12789617
PMID: 41513611

ABSTRACT

Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and long COVID are two post-viral diseases, which share many common symptoms and pathophysiological alterations. Yet a mechanistic explanation of disease induction and maintenance is lacking. This hinders discovery and implementation of biomarkers and treatment options, and ultimately establishment of effective clinical resolution. Here, we propose that acute viral infection results in (in)direct endothelial dysfunction and senescence, which at blood-brain barrier, cerebral arteries, gastrointestinal tract, and skeletal muscle can explain symptoms. The endothelial senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) is proinflammatory, pro-oxidative, procoagulant, primed for vasoconstriction, and characterized by impaired regulation of tissue repair, but also leads to dysregulated inflammatory processes. Immune abnormalities in ME/CFS and long COVID can account for persistence of endothelial senescence long past the acute infection by preventing their clearance, thereby providing a mechanism for the chronic nature of ME/CFS and long COVID. The systemic and tissue-specific effects of endothelial senescence can thus explain multisystem involvement in and subtypes of ME/CFS and long COVID, including dysregulated blood flow and perfusion deficits. This can occur in all tissues, but especially in brain as evidenced by findings of reduced cerebral blood flow and impaired perfusion of various brain regions, post-exertional malaise (PEM), gastrointestinal disturbances, and fatigue. Paramount to this theory is affected endothelium, and bidirectional sustainment of immune abnormalities and endothelial senescence. The recognition of endothelial cell dysfunction and senescence as a core element in aetiology of both ME/CFS and Long COVID should aid in establishment of effective biomarkers and treatment regimens.
