1. Glia. 2026 Feb;74(2):e70130. doi: 10.1002/glia.70130.

Suppression of Astrocytic PirB Alleviates Aβ-Induced Excitotoxicity and 
Cognitive Deficits via EAAT Expression.

Zhang X(1)(2), Zhao Y(3), Chen X(4), Shen W(1), Huang L(1), Tan T(1).

Author information:
(1)Oujiang Laboratory (Zhejiang Lab for Regenerative Medicine, Vision and Brain 
Health), Institute of Aging, Key Laboratory of Alzheimer's Disease of Zhejiang 
Province, Zhejiang Provincial Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders, the 
Affiliated Wenzhou Kangning Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang, P. R. China.
(2)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Brain Disorders & Institute of Basic and 
Translational Medicine, Xi'an Medical University, Xi'an, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Xi'an Medical University, Xi'an, P. R. 
China.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, School of Basic Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong 
University Health Science Center, Xi'an, P. R. China.

Glutamate-mediated neurotoxicity is a key factor in the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease, yet its regulatory mechanism and connection to the amyloid 
β (Aβ) cascade remain unclear. This study examined the role of the astrocytic Aβ 
receptor, PirB, on glutamate reuptake, excitotoxic neuronal death, and 
cognition. In vitro, primary astrocytes were treated with soluble PirB 
extracellular peptide (PEP), the PirB inhibitor Fluspirilene, or lentiviral 
vectors encoding PirB or shPirB. We measured excitatory amino acid transporter 
(EAAT) expression, intracellular glutamate levels, and calcium influx in 
astrocytes. We also evaluated neuronal apoptosis in neuron-astrocyte 
co-cultures. PirB inhibition (via PEP or Fluspirilene) significantly increased 
EAAT1 and EAAT2 expression and activated the mTOR signaling. This was 
accompanied by elevated astrocytic glutamate levels, decreased intracellular 
calcium, as well as reduced neuronal apoptosis, whereas PirB overexpression had 
the opposite effects. In vivo, mice with astrocyte-specific PirB conditional 
knockout (cKO) were injected with Aβ oligomers into the hippocampus and 
subjected to cognitive behavioral assays. Hippocampal neuronal loss and 
apoptosis were evaluated through Nissl and TUNEL staining. PirB cKO mice showed 
enhanced exploratory behavior, improved working memory, and higher EAAT 
expression, along with higher Bcl-2/Bax ratios, mTOR activation, and reduced 
neuronal apoptosis compared with Aβ-injected PirBflox/flox mice. Overall, our 
findings identify astrocytic PirB as a key driver of Aβ-triggered 
glutamate-mediated neurotoxicity and suggest that suppressing the PirB-mTOR-EAAT 
pathway could be a promising therapeutic strategy for mitigating Aβ-related 
cognitive impairment.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.70130
PMID: 41427574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]