1. JAMA Netw Open. 2024 Jul 1;7(7):e2423555. doi: 
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.23555.

Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome After SARS-CoV-2 Infection.

Unger ER(1), Lin JS(1), Wisk LE(2), Yu H(3), L'Hommedieu M(2), Lavretsky H(4), 
Montoy JCC(5), Gottlieb MA(6), Rising KL(7)(8), Gentile NL(9)(10)(11), 
Santangelo M(12), Venkatesh AK(3)(13), Rodriguez RM(5), Hill MJ(14), Geyer 
RE(10), Kean ER(7), Saydah S(15), McDonald SA(16)(17), Huebinger R(14), Idris 
AH(16), Dorney J(3), Hota B(18), Spatz ES(3)(19), Stephens KA(10)(20), Weinstein 
RA(12)(21), Elmore JG(2); Innovative Support for Patients with SARS-CoV-2 
Infections Registry (INSPIRE) Group.

Collaborators: Koo K, Derden A, Gatling K, Guzman D, Yang G, Kaadan AM, 
Hassaballa M, Jerger R, Ahmed Z, Choi M, Pavlopoulos A, Kesari A, Gaylord CA, 
Gomez C, Lomas E, Boliboun PJ, Patel K, Malicki C, Lin Z, Li SX, Ebna Mannan I, 
Yang Z, Liu M, Ulrich A, Kinsman J, Pierce S, Puente X, Salah W, Nichol G, 
Anderson J, Schiffgens M, Morse D, Adams K, Stober T, Maat Z, O'Laughlin KN, 
Willis M, Zhang Z, Chang G, Lyon V, Klabbers RE, Ruiz L, Malone K, Park J, Renzi 
N, Watts P, Kelly M, Schaeffer K, Grau D, Cheng D, Shutty C, Charlton A, 
Shughart L, Shughart H, Amadio G, Miao J, Hannikainen P, Chandler C, Diaz Roldan 
K, Eguchi M, Moreno R, Wang RC, Kemball R, Chan V, Lara Chavez C, Wong A, 
Arreguin M, Kane A, Nikonowicz P, Sapp S, Gallegos D, Martin KR, Plumb ID, Hall 
AJ, Briggs-Hagen M.

Author information:
(1)Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for 
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Division of General Internal Medicine & Health Services Research, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles.
(3)Center for Outcomes Research & Evaluation (CORE), Section of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of California, San Francisco.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(7)Department of Emergency Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(8)Jefferson Center for Connected Care, Sidney Kimmel Medical School, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(9)Post-COVID Rehabilitation and Recovery Clinic, University of Washington, 
Seattle.
(10)Department of Family Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle.
(11)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle.
(12)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(13)Department of Emergency Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(14)Department of Emergency Medicine, UTHealth Houston, Houston, Texas.
(15)National Center for Immunizations and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(16)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas.
(17)Clinical Informatics Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas.
(18)Tendo Systems, Inc, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(19)Department of Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(20)Department of Biomedical Informatics and Medical Education, University of 
Washington, Seattle.
(21)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Cook County 
Hospital, Chicago, Illinois.

IMPORTANCE: Chronic symptoms reported following an infection with SARS-CoV-2, 
such as cognitive problems, overlap with symptoms included in the definition of 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence of ME/CFS-like illness subsequent to acute 
SARS-CoV-2 infection, changes in ME/CFS symptoms through 12 months of follow-up, 
and the association of ME/CFS symptoms with SARS-CoV-2 test results at the acute 
infection-like index illness.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This prospective, multisite, longitudinal 
cohort study (Innovative Support for Patients with SARS-CoV-2 Infections 
Registry [INSPIRE]) enrolled participants from December 11, 2020, to August 29, 
2022. Participants were adults aged 18 to 64 years with acute symptoms 
suggestive of SARS-CoV-2 infection who received a US Food and Drug 
Administration-approved SARS-CoV-2 test at the time of illness and did not die 
or withdraw from the study by 3 months. Follow-up surveys were collected through 
February 28, 2023.
EXPOSURE: COVID-19 status (positive vs negative) at enrollment.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: The main outcome was the weighted proportion of 
participants with ME/CFS-like illness based on the 2015 Institute of Medicine 
clinical case definition using self-reported symptoms.
RESULTS: A total of 4378 participants were included in the study. Most were 
female (3226 [68.1%]). Mean (SD) age was 37.8 (11.8) years. The survey 
completion rates ranged from 38.7% (3613 of 4738 participants) to 76.3% (1835 of 
4738) and decreased over time. The weighted proportion of participants 
identified with ME/CFS-like illness did not change significantly at 3 through 12 
months of follow-up and was similar in the COVID-19-positive (range, 2.8%-3.7%) 
and COVID-19-negative (range, 3.1%-4.5%) groups. Adjusted analyses revealed no 
significant difference in the odds of ME/CFS-like illness at any time point 
between COVID-19-positive and COVID-19-negative individuals (marginal odds ratio 
range, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.42-1.67] to 1.18 [95% CI, 0.55-2.51]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this prospective cohort study, there was no 
evidence that the proportion of participants with ME/CFS-like illness differed 
between those infected with SARS-CoV-2 vs those without SARS-CoV-2 infection up 
to 12 months after infection. A 3% to 4% prevalence of ME/CFS-like illness after 
an acute infection-like index illness would impose a high societal burden given 
the millions of persons infected with SARS-CoV-2.

DOI: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2024.23555
PMCID: PMC11270135
PMID: 39046739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Wisk 
reported receiving grants from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) and US Department of Health and Human Services during the conduct of the 
study. Dr Lavretsky reported receiving grants from the National Center for 
Complementary and Integrative Health, National Institute of Mental Health, US 
Department of Defense, and Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) 
outside the submitted work and royalties for books published by Oxford 
University Press and Johns Hopkins University Press. Dr Montoy reported 
receiving grants from the CDC’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory 
Diseases (NCIRD) during the conduct of the study and from the CDC outside the 
submitted work. Dr Gottlieb reported receiving grants from the CDC during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Rising reported receiving grants from the CDC during 
the conduct of the study and from the National Institutes of Health outside the 
submitted work. Dr Gentile reported receiving grants from the CDC during the 
conduct of the study and being the primary care medical director of the COVID 
Aftercare, Recovery, and Support (CAReS) Clinic at the University of Washington. 
Dr Venkatesh reported receiving grants from the CDC during the conduct of the 
study and from the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Foundation outside 
the submitted work. Dr Huebinger reported receiving grants from the CDC during 
the conduct of the study. Dr Idris reported receiving grants from the CDC during 
the conduct of the study. Dr Spatz reported receiving grant funding from the 
CDC; US Food and Drug Administration to support projects within the Yale 
University–Mayo Clinic Center of Excellence in Regulatory Science and 
Innovation; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; and PCORI. Dr Stephens 
reported receiving grants from the CDC during the conduct of the study. Dr 
Weinstein reported receiving grants from the CDC during the conduct of the 
study. Dr Elmore reported receiving grants from the CDC during the conduct of 
the study and serving as editor-in-chief of adult primary care for UpToDate and 
as director of the National Clinician Scholars Program at the University of 
California, Los Angeles. No other disclosures were reported.